---
layout: frontpage
date: 2015-01-21 03:28
title: Why Do People Like Ugly Things
category: essay
tags: essay

---

Nearly all design exists to be seen. Mainstream clients and less-educated designers intuitively approach this additively--make the type larger, press the bold button, add an underline. If you have the technical skills, give the text a stroke, add an inner glow, an outer glow, a drop shadow. Maybe some clip art? SHOUT LOUDER.

This is not what you learn at most design schools.

Design students are first taught the tenets of modernism and the Swiss style. They are taught about how to read the details of a typeface, how to design on a grid, how to create a dynamic but clean composition. They probably read Beatice Warde’s  "The Crystal Goblet," Jan Tschichold’s The New Typography, and The Elements of Typographic Style
by Robert Bringhurst. Their first introduction to branding is Paul Rand. Later in their education they will likely consider more contemporary design theory, but their style is always informed by these modernist giants.  The crystal goblet might have been pushed to the back of the shelf, but it hasn’t been shattered. corny maybe?

Modernism, of course, is a movement of a particular time in history. It was influenced by the technology of its time. When full-color printing was significantly more expensive than one-color, it was important that the design could operate on a flat, graphic level. Typesetting encouraged type being set in blocks, but it was still made by hand, making geometric purity a precise art.  For a logo to remain consistant, its parts needed to be broken down into simple, scalable, geometry. 

(some examples of swiss/corporate design?)

But, just like today, there were plenty of designers and clients unaware of or unswayed by modernist theory. Smaller businesses often employed more idiosyncratic styles created by local craftspeople. Hand-painted signs proliferated, and local print shops offered dynamic custom woodblock cuts. Sign painting and printmaking are highly techical skills, and were taught from master-to-apprentice hands-on in the workplace. Skilled and complex decoration required additional training and labor, proving the value of the work to the client.

(examples of beautiful hand-painted signage, examples from the Globe collection?)

These craftspeople-designers still operate today, but with a new set of tools. These designers are often as adept, if not more so, at employing the features of Photoshop and Illustrator than their more formally trained peers, and they put their skills to full use. 

A designer versed in theory might utilize an effect to suit their concept by learning how to create it specifically for their need or by art directing a specialist. While digital printing has made full-color inexpensive, they often approach value with a sense of quality and precision, perhaps choosing the subtle effect of using two carefully chosen custom-mixed inks than risking the more variable quality of the digital press. 

More technically trained designers, still often working in-house for printers and sign shops, learn the ins and outs of software effects and filters.  These effects can look like magic to a less-sophisticated client, and they often feel that they get their money’s worth by deploying them all at once. Without training in the modernist attention to detail, cheap full-color printing is used to its maximum potential, with often chaotic results. 

WHITE SPACE IS A LUXURY GOOD

For the educated designer, white space is a vital tool. It is a means to create emphasis, to direct the eye of the viewer. It creates a sense of control and clarity.

Many clients hate it.

White space is empty space. It is a waste of paper. 

For publications and advertisers targeting audiences with less disposable income, they strive to provide as much information using as few resources as possible. Margins shrink with profit margins. Audiences also share this attitude--with only a few extra dollars to spend on a magazine, they want to know that they are going to get a lot of bang for their buck. A full and chaotic ad layout conveys that there are just so many deals they couldn’t all fit comfortably on one page, and allows a reader pressed for time to feel that they can quickly scan for what they need.

A wealthier audience, on the other hand, appreciates an excess of white space. They are often more educated, and even if they have not been explicitly taught its theory, have learned to appreciate the beauty of modernism. They can afford the paper--or really, the product that has been marked up to pay for the paper--and they can take the time to enjoy the experience of something carefully crafted.

LOW PRICE, BIG TYPE
When a customer does not have a lot of money to spend, the price is one of the major factors in making a purchase. Advertisements targeting these buyers make the prices and “value words” (SALE! CLEARANCE! etc.)  in their layouts as large as possible. As the target audience becomes more wealthy, the prices shrink in favor of images and descriptions of the products for sale. Luxury products are sold not for necessity but on the basis of emotion and experience. The imagery of the ad is typically artful and atmospheric, often with the product itself only tangentally shown. In these ads, price becomes nearly vestigial if it is present at all.